So, continuing our discussion about efficiently
computing recursive functions, let us look
at the problem of computing grid paths.
So, we have a grid, a rectangular grid, where
we start walking at the bottom left corner,
and the rule is that we can only go up or
right. So, we want to start at the bottom
and we want to reach the top right corner.
So, we can number the coordinates. So, the
bottom right corner we call (. This particular
grid has got 5 columns and 10 rows. So, the
top right corner is (5, 10). And the question
that we ask is how many different ways are
going, are that go from (0, 0) to (5, 10).
So, what do we mean by different ways. Well,
here for instance is one grid path. This blue
line takes us up from (0, 0), then right,
then up, then right and so on. So, this traces
out one particular sequence of edges along
this grid taking us from the bottom left corner
to the top right. So, we could, of course
choose a different one, which in this particular
one the red one and the blue one are completely
disjoint. They do not use any of the same
edges, but in general, I could have paths
which overlap with the other ones. So, this
yellow one partly overlaps with the blue at
the middle, over here, and then it overlaps
with the red one over here, right. We want
to know how many such different paths are
there from (0, 0) to (m, n).
Now, it turns out this problem is actually
a very classical problem in combinatorics
(counting). So, the way to analyze this is
to see, that if I want to go from the bottom
to the top, then I must, on the, in one-dimensional
I must go from 0 to 5. In the other dimensions,
I must go to 0 to 10. So, totally I must make
15 steps, right. There is no choice, I must
walk 15 segments.
In general, if I am going to some (m, n),
I must walk m plus n segments. Now, if I have
these 15 segments and I am going to (, that
means, I have to go right, 5 times, right,
and I have to go up 10 times. Now, in which
sequence I do these rights and ups is what
determines which path I take, right. But every
path will have exactly 5 right moves and exactly
10 up moves, right. So, there will be 10 up
moves and 5 right moves.
So, now if I take this and I think of this
as an overall thing saying this is my 1st
move, this is my 2nd move, this is my 3rd
move and so on, up to the 15th move. Then
if I tell you that you moved right, I moved
right at these positions, at some five positions,
then automatically I must have moved up at
the remaining positions because I have to
do exactly 5 and exactly 5 right and 10 up.
So, therefore, all I need to do to determine
exactly which path I am taking is to fix the
position of the 5 rights moves among the total
15, right. So, among 15 positions I choose
5. This is usually written as 15 choose 5,
right. So, this is a very standard, combinatorial
thing, 15 choose 5 n choose k is n factorial
divided by k factorial into n - k factorial,
right. So, 15 factorial divided by 10 factorial
times 5 factorial, it happens to be 3003 ((Refer
Time:). So, for this particular grid there
are 3003 ways.
Now, of course, instead of choosing the right
positions I could also have told you the 10
positions where I moved up, that leaves 5
open positions where I must move in right.
So, this would give us 15 choose 10, and so
it is not a coincidence that 15 choose 10
and 15 choose 5 are in fact the same expression.
So, whether you choose to compute it as 15
choose 5 or 15 choose 10, it does not matter.
So, in general it is going to be m plus n
choose m or m plus n choose n where I am going
from (0, 0) up to (m, n), right. I have to
make m right moves and n up moves. So, I need
to choose m out of m plus n total moves or
n out of m plus n, both of them will give
me the same expression, because that is why,
n choose k, n choose k is n factorial k factorial
n - k. So, if you just exchange k and n - k
you get the same expression.
So, that is all very well, but what, for example,
if this is not a perfect grid. Supposing we
have some intersections, which are blocked.
So, in this particular case, if you look at
this intersection, which is (2, 4), right,
it is 1, 2 and then 1, 2, 3, 4. So, we have
put a black mark to indicate that for the
moment, you cannot go through it, right. So,
any part that goes through (2, 4), should
not be counted among the valid path from (0,
0) to (5, 10).
So, the blue path that we had drawn before
actually goes through this intersection. So,
this path is no longer a valid path. The red
path is ok, because it bypasses it, but the
yellow path unfortunately also goes through
this intersection. So, of the three paths,
that we had seen so far, two actually do not
go through. So, the question now is, out of
those 3003 paths that we said were there,
from (0, 0) to (5, 10), how many of them are
still valid if you are not allowed to go through
this intersection.
So, it turns over that actually this also
has a combinatorial solution. So, what you
can say is that in order to go from here and
if I want to avoid a block intersection. So,
let me see how many ways are there of going
through it and just remove them, right. So,
what I will do is, I will say, that every
path it goes through the current block intersection
is a path from (0, 0) to 92, 4) followed by
a path from (2, 4) to (5, 10) because it goes
through (2, 4). So, we can think of this as
a smaller grid from (0, 0) to (2, 4), right.
So, if we solve, this is, this general m plus
n m plus n choose n, right. So, I get 6 choose
2. So, I get there are 15 ways to go from
(0, 0) to (2, 4). Likewise, if I consider
this grid, then this is 3 and this is 6 because
it was 10 and 5, I have done 2 and 4 respectively.
So, after 2 there is still 3 left horizontally;
after 4 there is still 6 left vertically.
So, this is like going from a new (0, 0) to
(3, 6), right. So, there I get 6 plus 3 choose
3 and this turns out to be 84.
Now, any part, which comes to the bottom 2
to 4 followed by any part, that goes from
there to the top is a valid path passing through
2 to 4. So, I multiply these two numbers,
I have to take 15 times 84 and again 1260.
So, this is a total number of paths, which
are going through (, but I do not want paths
going through (. I am saying, that paths going
2 to 4 are not allowed. So, I must count all
these parts as invalid. So, I take the original
3003 subtract. So, I take 3003 and I subtract
1260 and I get 1743, right. So, taking the
combinatorial exercise to the next step. I
can find out how many paths go from the origin
to the given point on the top right provided
one path one position is blocked.
So, this imperfection could be more complex.
I could have two positions blocked, right.
In this case, the blue, yellow and red paths
are all invalid because the red path also
happens to get blocked. So, now I have blocked
at ( and also at (, right. So, if I count
all the paths going through two, (, which
I have already done, I can subtract this.
Similarly, I can compute all the paths going
through ( and subtract those.
But now what happens is, this yellow path
is subtracted twice because it is part of
the paths going through ( and part of the
paths going through (, right. So, I have accidentally
removed it twice from my total, so I have
to put it back. You have to now compute those
paths, which go through both the intersections
and add them back and this combinatorial is
called inclusion and exclusion. You come across
it also sometimes when you do Venn diagram,
when you do sets.
If you want to find out, now you say, how
many people are, how many sets have one element,
how many sets are in the intersection, how
many sets you have, you know, you are, students
taking three subjects, English, history and
physics, and then so many taking English and
history, so many taking history and physics
and so on. So, when you do that kind of counting
you will exactly do this inclusion exclusion,
right. So, as we get more and more messy grids,
this combinatorial question becomes more and
more complicated to solve this way.
So, let us look for a better solution. So,
as you might guess, since we are looking at
these kind of inductive formulations and recursive
programs, what we are really looking for is
the inductive formulation of the grid path.
So, let us ask ourselves the following question.
How do I get to a point (i,j) on the grid?
So, I claim, that given our structure, which
is, that we can go right or we can go up,
there are only two ways I can come here. I
can either come right from the neighbor on
my left. So, from (i, j-1) I can make one
step right and come to (i,j) or from (i-1,
j), I can go up once there. So, if I have
any paths, which starts at (, right, any path,
which somehow comes to (i, j-1), then by taking
one, exactly one step, that path becomes one
path to (i,j) right. So, every path from ( to
(i-1,j) (i,j -1) can be extended in a unique
way to (i,j). Likewise, any path, which comes
from ( to (i-1,j) can be extended in the unique
way, right. So, if I count the task coming
to the two neighbours, then each of those
paths can be extended to reach the current
node. So, therefore, I get the inductive formulation
as follows.
So, let us write paths (i,j) to denote the
number of paths from ( to the current point
(i,j). So, what we have just seen from our
inductive analysis on the problem is, that
if you are at (i,j), then the paths come from
left or from below. So, the paths to (i,j)
are the sum of paths to (i - 1,j) and the
paths to (i,j - 1). So, there are, of course,
some boundary conditions.
So, if you look at our grid, in general, then
if we look at the leftmost column, let us
start the bottom row. So, we start the bottom
row, right, then we know, that this is of
the form (, then ( and so on to (, right.
So, anything of the form (i,0) derives its
value only from the left because there is
no corresponding row from the left. Similarly,
from the leftmost column, from this (, ( and
so on up to (. And now, there is nothing from
the left. So, I can only get it from j-1 from
the row below.
And finally, you have to ask ourselves what
happens at the initial conditions. So, if
I am at ( and I want to go to (, how many
ways are there? Well, this is a trivial path,
there is only one way, by just staying there.
It is important that it is not 0 because remember,
that if it is 0, then everywhere you are just
adding things and nothing will come, you will
get no paths. So, it is important, that there
is exactly one path from ( to itself.
So, how do we deal with holes in this setup?
That is easy, we just say, that whenever there
is a hole at a given point we just declare
parts of (i,j) to be 0. In other words, if
there is a hole at some point, then this thing
is going to contribute 0 regardless of what
is above or below. So, if I come, if I have
something coming from here and here I will
just ignore it and say this is 0. And likewise,
when I compute the thing above, there will
be some value x coming from the left. So,
this will just be x+0. And similarly, over
here there will be something coming from below,
say y, and this will be 0+y, right.
So, any hole will just have by declaration,
paths (i,j) equal to 0 because nothing can
go through it and this will automatically
propagate to its neighbors correctly. The
remaining inductive definition remains exactly
as before, right. So, if it is not a hole,
it depends on its two neighbors. Then we have
the bottom row left column and the origin
as base cases.
So, the difficulty with this calculation is
the same as involved with the Fibonacci, which
is, that if I have a particular calculation,
say for example, supposing we start a recursive
calculation at (, then this will ask for ( and
(. Now, these in turn will both ask for (, so
(. if I just evaluate this paths function
recursively, the way it is written in the
inductive definition, it will end up calling
paths of ( at least twice from this perspective
and this wasteful recomputation will occur
throughout and we will get an exponential
number of calls to paths.
So, we have seen before, we have two technologies
to deal with this. So, one is memoization
where we just make sure that we never call
paths (i,j) the same value of i and j more
than once. The other way is to, is to anticipate
the subproblems, figure out how they depend
on each other, then solve them directly iteratively
in a suitable order and this is what we call
dynamic programming.
So, how would we use dynamic programming on
the grid? So, this is our grid with the two
holes at the ( and (. The first thing is to
identify DAG structure of the dependencies,
right. So, it is, we know, that every (i,j)
depends on, it is left and bottom neighbor.
So, this is how we do the DAG. If you remember,
if these depends on the two values, left and
below, we draw an edge from the left to this
node and from below to this node.
So, this is the DAG structure, right. So,
the yellow edges represent, the DAG structure.
So, the DAG structure goes naturally from
the bottom left to the top, right. So, this
is the only 0 in degree node, in this DAG.
So, if you want to do a computation of this
grid to grid paths directly using dynamic
programming, the only place we can start is
(, right.
So, we start at ( and we fill the value there,
which is 1. And now, we observe, that we have
two possibilities. We can go to the right
or we can go up because these two dependencies
are now removed. So, let us just go row by
row. So, if we do this value, then automatically
this dependency will go. So, we will be able
to do this value, when this will go, so we
can do this value and so on.
So, we can compute the entire bottom row and
these are all inherited from the left using
our base case, right. So, and it is very clear,
I mean, intuitively there is only one way
to get any of these places, which is just
to go straight from left to right, no deviation
is possible. So, there is only one path to
every node at the bottom node.
Now, we can move up one row. We can see, that
this node in the first row from the second
row is now available. It was already available,
but if we do that we can also do that to the
node to it’s right and the node to its right
and so on, right. So, we can fill the entire
second row and at each point we are just adding
up. So, 2s, 2 plus 1 is 2, 1 plus 3 is 4 and
so on. Likewise, we can do the next hole.
So, for example, 6 plus 4 is 10 and so on.
Likewise, you can do the next row, 20 plus
15 is 35.
Now, we come to the holes, right. So, at the
holes we said, that these will be 0 regardless
of what comes from below. Even though there
is 10 coming from below, this first hole must
be 0, 35 from below, the hole must be 0. So,
we just compute this row exactly as before
except that the holes we input as 0 regardless
of what is coming into it. We do not count
it as 5 plus 10, we just put 0. We do not
count this hole as 20 plus 35, we put 0.
Now, when we go to the next row, likewise
this 0 contributes only 0. So, above it, because
no paths can come through this, this direction,
the number of paths coming here is only 6
coming from the left. So, ((Refer Time:) number
of paths coming here is only 26 coming from
the left. So, the number of paths, which are
coming to this point could not come from there.
So, this 20 is copied there, this 56 is copied.
So, we can do this row by row.
And if you can just enumerate every row like
this by copying, adding up the values to the
left and below and we will find, that there
are actually 1363 paths with these two obstructions.
And if we move these obstructions around,
we can redo these calculations, it will be
as efficient, we do not have to worry about
this inclusion and exclusion. So, this is
one way to do the dynamic programming, but
remember any topological sort will work.
So, we could instead start with 1 and go column
by column, right. So, we can go up and fill
that and then we can fill up the entire first
column. The first column will again be only
once because there will be only way to do
this.
Having filled the first column, now we can
fill the second column and then you can fill
the third column and the fourth column and
so on. And obviously, this is only a different
way of enumerating the values. The value is
going to change. So, we should eventually
end up with the same values at every point.
And finally, you can also do it by DAG. So,
notice, that when I do this one, then these
two points now are 0 indegree nodes. I can
do both of them. Now, I have these three points,
a 0 indegree nodes. So, I can do all three
of these. Then I have these four points, as
0 indegree nodes. So, I can do all of these
and so on. So, this is just to emphasize,
that the choice of topological sort is entirely
up to you. Very often, it will be more complicated
to program this kind of diagonal things
So, usually what one tries to do, is a row
and column, but any topological ordering of
the, of the base values can be used in order
to compute them. All you need to know is,
when you come a node, the value you want to
compute, all its dependencies must have already
been computed, that is what this DAG’s structure
gives you, right. So, the sub problems form
a DAG and you have to navigate your way through
the DAG in a most effective way as far as
programming it. It is usually by a row or
a column in a table, but it could be by diagonal
also.
So, finally, before we conclude, let us just
look at an instructive illustration of the
difference between a memoization and dynamic
programming. So, so if we have a bunch of
holes which are along the border, then intuitively
what it says is, that if I start from here
and I go anyway like this, I am going to get
stuck, ok. So, if I start my memoization from
there, then everywhere it is just going to
see a 0. So, all these values are going to
be 0, and memoization is not going to look
further around these.
So, memoriation, I claim, is only going to
look along this outer boundary, only these
grid points will actually be computed by memoization.
Whereas, if I do dynamic programming, I will
start from here and I would blindly fill up.
Only when I reach the 0, I have realized,
that the values are kind of computed inside
the grid, do not worry, right.
So, there is this entire shaded region in
this grid whose values are not needed because
they cannot contribute to any path from, from
the bottom to the top because every path going
through them, you get blocked by one of these
holes, right. Whereas, the dynamic programming
is now going to blindly compute the values
for these points even though they are useless.
Memoization, will not - because it only computes
by need and it will never reach these points,
right.
So, therefore, the memo table will have a
linear number of entries, right. It will have,
say, 2 m plus 2 n entries. It will only have
the outer boundary of this grid to be covered.
So, it will have linear number of entries
in terms of the two dimensions, whereas dynamic
programming will have m times n entries. It
will have every grid point will be computed
in the table even though most of them are
useless.
So, in a sense, in this example, dynamic programming
is wastefully computing values, which we can
by little bit of analysis realize will never
be used because it is just blindly computing
every sub problem on its way from the origin
to the top. However, as we said before, dynamic
programming is iterative. It is going to be
just the simple, memoization is going to be
recursive. It is going to be optimized to
not make the same recursive call twice, but
nevertheless it is recursive and recursion
carries a cost in terms of execution in a
programming language.
So, therefore though this looks like a wasteful
dynamic programming strategy in case the holes
are distributed in a bad way. Actually, it
does not matter. It usually turns out, that
a dynamic programming implementation will
be usually more efficient than a memoization
implementation. So, the memoized implementation
is easy to do because we know, that we can
go from an inductive definition directly to
a recursive program.
And we saw last time, that there is a generic
formula, or a recipe, to make any recursive
program memoized. You just have to insert
a couple of steps saying, look up the table
and feed the table, right. So, therefore,
getting a memoized implementation is very
easy, getting a dynamic programing implementation
requires some analysis of the subproblems
and figuring out a good order in which to
evaluate the sub problems. So, it is more
work, but this extra work usually pays off,
because then you can get an interactive computation
of all the subproblems rather than a recursive
one.